Add an `html_attr` function to make outputting HTML attributes easier (#3930)
twigphp/Twig: doc/functions/html_attr.rst

``html_attr``
=============

.. versionadded:: 3.23

    The ``html_attr`` function was added in Twig 3.23.

The ``html_attr`` function renders HTML attributes from one or more arrays,
taking care of proper escaping.

.. code-block:: html+twig

    <div {{ html_attr({class: ['foo', 'bar'], id: 'main'}) }}>
        Content
    </div>

    {# Output: <div class="foo bar" id="main">Content</div> #}

The function accepts multiple attribute arrays. Internally, it uses

> :doc:`html_attr_merge<../filters/html_attr_merge>` to combine the arguments:

Reviewer: I think we should use a `ref` link to link directly to the merging rules instead.

.. code-block:: html+twig

    {% set base_attrs = {class: ['btn']} %}
    {% set variant_attrs = {class: ['btn-primary'], disabled: true} %}

    <button {{ html_attr(base_attrs, variant_attrs) }}>
        Click me
    </button>

    {# Output: <button class="btn btn-primary" disabled="">Click me</button> #}

> You can use the shorthand Twig syntax to pass variables as attributes when the

Reviewer: no need to document that here. This is totally independent of this filter (as it is purely a feature of the syntax to define hashes in Twig, which is already documented elsewhere)

Author: Agree, but that syntax may not be known to everyone and is particularly helpful here. 

I'll change it to say something like "shorthand notation for mappings can be particularly helpful" with an example, but not explain it.

variable name matches the attribute name:

.. code-block:: html+twig

    {% set id = 'user-123' %}
    {% set href = '/profile' %}

    <a {{ html_attr({id, href}) }}>Profile</a>

    {# Equivalent to: html_attr({id: id, href: href}) #}
    {# Output: <a id="user-123" href="/profile">Profile</a> #}

``null`` and Boolean Attribute Values
-------------------------------------

In general, ``false`` or ``null`` values will omit printing an attribute altogether.
The exception is for ``aria-*`` attributes, see below.

.. code-block:: html+twig

    {# false and null omit the attribute entirely #}
    <input {{ html_attr({disabled: false, title: null}) }}>
    {# Output: <input> #}

``true`` will print the attribute with the empty value ``""``. This is XHTML compatible,
and in HTML 5 equivalent to using the short attribute notation without a value.

.. code-block:: html+twig

    {# true becomes an empty string value #}
    <input {{ html_attr({required: true}) }}>
    {# Output: <input required="">, which is equivalent to <input required> #}

ARIA Attributes
---------------

> The WAI-ARIA standard is special in its handling of boolean attributes.

Reviewer: It is more the fact that WAI-ARIA does not use boolean attributes but enumerated attributes.

As noted in the spec (see https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-1.2/#enumeration-example and https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-1.2/#typemapping), those states are not actually booleans in the DOM but strings.
The fact that this `html_attr` function introduces a special handling of boolean values in ARIA attributes is a decision related purely to the implementation of that function, not to WAI-ARIA.

Thus, for ``aria-*`` attributes, boolean values are converted to strings
``"true"`` and ``"false"``.

.. code-block:: html+twig

    <button {{ html_attr({'aria-pressed': true, 'aria-hidden': false}) }}>
        Toggle
    </button>

    {# Output: <button aria-pressed="true" aria-hidden="false">Toggle</button> #}

Data Attributes
---------------

> For ``data-*`` attributes, values that are arrays or objects are automatically JSON-encoded:

Reviewer: the implementation only does it for iterable values, not for all PHP objects. This doc is confusing.

Author: Trying to improve it. The condition is `!$value instanceof AttributeValueInterface && null !== $value && !\is_scalar($value)`

.. code-block:: html+twig

    <div {{ html_attr({'data-config': {theme: 'dark', size: 'large'}}) }}>
        Content
    </div>

    {# Output: <div data-config="{&quot;theme&quot;:&quot;dark&quot;,&quot;size&quot;:&quot;large&quot;}">Content</div> #}

> Array Values

Reviewer: Shouldn't this come _after_ the section about style attributes, so that all special kind of attributes are handled first, before the general rule for arrays ?

Author: will move it up

Author: Now that I see it, I think I'll try to describe the generic array case first, then the special cases follow (with a forward reference)

Reviewer: that's fine as well, but then data attributes should be moved down.

------------

Arrays are automatically converted to space-separated token lists of their values:

.. code-block:: html+twig

    <div {{ html_attr({class: ['btn', 'btn-primary', 'btn-lg']}) }}>
        Button
    </div>

    {# Output: <div class="btn btn-primary btn-lg">Button</div> #}

.. note::

    This is not bound to the ``class`` attribute, but works like that

>     for every attribute except ``data-*``, where special rules apply.

Reviewer: special rules also apply for `style`

``html_attr``
=============

.. _html_attr:

.. versionadded:: 3.23

    The ``html_attr`` function was added in Twig 3.23.

> The ``html_attr`` function renders HTML attributes from one or more arrays,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``html_attr`` function renders HTML attributes from one or more mapping,
```

taking care of proper escaping.

.. code-block:: html+twig

    <div {{ html_attr({class: ['foo', 'bar'], id: 'main'}) }}>
        Content
    </div>

    {# Output: <div class="foo bar" id="main">Content</div> #}

> The function accepts multiple attribute arrays. Internally, it uses

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The function accepts multiple attribute maps. Internally, it uses
```

``null`` and Boolean Attribute Values
-------------------------------------

``null`` values always omit printing an attribute altogether.

The boolean ``false`` value also omits the attribute altogether, with an
exception for ``aria-*`` attribute names, see below.

.. code-block:: html+twig

    {# null omits the attribute entirely, and so does false for non-"aria-*" #}
    <input {{ html_attr({disabled: false, title: null}) }}>
    {# Output: <input> #}

``true`` will print the attribute with the empty value ``""``. This is XHTML compatible,
and in HTML 5 equivalent to using the short attribute notation without a value. An exception
is made for ``data-*`` and ``aria-*`` attributes, see below.

.. code-block:: html+twig

    {# true becomes an empty string value #}
    <input {{ html_attr({required: true}) }}>
    {# Output: <input required="">, which is equivalent to <input required> #}

Array Values
------------

Attribute values that are iterables are automatically converted to space-separated
token lists of the values. Exceptions apply for ``data-*`` and ``style`` attributes,
described further below.

.. code-block:: html+twig

>     <div {{ html_attr({class: ['btn', 'btn-primary', 'btn-lg']}) }}>

Reviewer 3: Is it possible to use merge multiple syntax like Vue.js does? E.g.: `['btn btn-sm', { 'btn-active': isActive }]`

Author: No, currently attribute values can be either scalars or iterables that will have their values concatenated. Having another array inside an array value is probably not going to work with the current implementation, but this might be fixable with special `AttributeValue` implementations.

What _might_ work (haven't tried it) is:

``['btn', 'btn-sm', isActive ? 'btn-active']``

Reviewer 3: Thanks, and is the hash syntax alone supported?

Author: You mean `<div {{ html_attr({ class: { type: 'btn' } }) }}>`? Sure.

The main purpose I see for using hashes at the level of attribute values is that you can use them to designate elements that can later on be replaced. Like so:

```twig
{% set attrs = { class: { type: 'btn', role: 'btn-primary', importance: 'normal' } } %}
...
{% set attrs = attrs|html_attr_merge(hasErrors ? { class: { importance: 'warning' } }) %}
<div {{ html_attr(attrs) }} />

or same, without using the intermediate assignment:

<div {{ html_attr(attrs, hasErrors ? { class: { importance: 'warning' } }) }} />
```

If `hasErrors` is true, this will print `<div class="btn btn-primary warning"/>`.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure to understand your exemple, are you mixing things maybe?

The hash syntax is something like:
```twig
{% set isActive = true %}
<div {{ html_attr({
    class: ['btn', { 'btn-active': isActive }]
}) }} >
{# <div class="btn btn-active"> #}

{# or if isActive is false #}
{# <div class="btn"> #}
```

This kind of syntax is used in Vue.js, see https://vuejs.org/guide/essentials/class-and-style.html#class-and-style-bindings, and that's super useful.

Author: Ah, no! I was not aware of that, not using Vue.js.

There is no support to declare classes that way around, with the class name as key and a condition as the value.

But, again, it might be possible to add that through a custom `html_attr_type` implementation.

I am pretty much sure this should work though:

```twig
<div {{ html_attr({
    class: ['btn', isActive ? 'btn-active']
}) }} >
```

Reviewer: We already have `html_cva` to support that use case, which you can use to generate the value for the `class` attribute.

Author: That generates a string like `'btn btn-active'`, not an array, right?

Might be a problem to merge that with additional classes down the road.

Reviewer 3: That's true we have CVA, but it's more relevant when writing complexe components.

If I migrate my example to CVA, it would look like this:
```twig
{% set button_styles = html_cva(
    base: 'btn',
    variants: {
        isActive: {
            true: 'btn-active',
        }
    }
) %}
<div {{ html_attr({
    class: button_styles.apply({ isActive: true }),
}) }}></div>
```

Whereas this example is easier to write and understand IMHO, its similar to Vue.js syntax and React (thanks to the very popular [classnames](https://www.npmjs.com/package/classnames#usage-with-reactjs) package):  
```twig
<div {{ html_attr({
    class: ['btn', isActive ? 'btn-active']
}) }}></div>
```

Author: We could add a `classnames` filter that does the necessary conversion: For a given array, output a new array that contains as values all those keys that have a `true` value in the original array.

Reviewer 3: Well well well... https://twig.symfony.com/doc/3.x/functions/html_classes.html TIL :D

Reviewer: indeed, `html_classes` is the one closer to that use case. And it can totally be used inside `html_attr` to build one of the strings involved.

.. note::

    This is not bound to the ``class`` attribute name, but works for any attribute.

You can use the :ref:`html_attr_type` filter to specify a different strategy for
concatenating values (e.g., comma-separated for ``srcset`` attributes). This would
also override the special behavior for ``data-*`` and ``style``.

WAI-ARIA Attributes
-------------------

To make it more convenient to work with the `WAI-ARIA type mapping for HTML
<https://www.w3.org/TR/wai-aria-1.2/#typemapping>_`, boolean values for ``aria-*``
attributes are converted to strings ``"true"`` and ``"false"``.

.. code-block:: html+twig

    <button {{ html_attr({'aria-pressed': true, 'aria-hidden': false}) }}>
        Toggle
    </button>

    {# Output: <button aria-pressed="true" aria-hidden="false">Toggle</button> #}

Data Attributes
---------------

For ``data-*`` attributes, boolean ``true`` values will be converted to ``"true"``.
Values that are not scalars are automatically JSON-encoded.

.. code-block:: html+twig

    <div {{ html_attr({'data-config': {theme: 'dark', size: 'large'}, 'data-bool': true, 'data-false': false}) }}>
        Content
    </div>

>     {# Output: <div data-config="{&quot;theme&quot;:&quot;dark&quot;,&quot;size&quot;:&quot;large&quot;}" data-bool="true">Content</div> #}

Reviewer 2: data-false="false" no ?

Author: No. For `data-*`, `true` bill be `"true"`, but `false` will not be printed.

Referring to https://github.com/symfony/ux/issues/3269#issuecomment-3708588342, this is the React way of handling these attributes.

I am not doing frontend/client side development myself, but guess it makes sense because that way, you can write `el.dataset.boolValue` in JavaScript for `data-bool-value="true"` or a missing `data-bool-value` attribute?

> Style Attributes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Style Attribute
```

----------------

> The ``style`` attribute name has special handling when its value is an array or iterable object:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``style`` attribute name has special handling when its value is a sequence of objects:
```

Author: e8c36bf6

.. code-block:: html+twig

>     {# Associative arrays become CSS declarations #}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    {# Mappings become CSS declarations #}
```
